I want to tell you a love story but it
doesn't have a happy ending once upon a
time I was a stubborn five-year-old who
decided to become a marine biologist 34
years 400 scuba dives and one PhD later
I'm still completely enamored with the
ocean I spent a decade working with
fishing communities in the Caribbean
counting fish interviewing fishermen
redesigning fishing gear and developing
policy I've been helping to figure out
what sustainable management can look
like for places where food security jobs
and cultures all depend on the sea in
the midst of all this I fell in love
with a fish there are over 500 fish
species that live on Caribbean reefs but
the ones I just can't get out of my head
our parrotfish parrotfish live on coral
reefs all over the world there are 100
species they can grow well over a metre
long and weigh over 20 kilograms but
that's the boring stuff I want to tell
you five incredible things about these
fish first they have a mouth like a
parrot's beak which is strong enough to
bite coral although mostly they're after
algae they are the lawnmowers of the
reef this is key because many reefs are
overgrown with algae due to nutrient
pollution from sewage and fertilizer
that runs off of land and there just
aren't enough herbivores like parrotfish
left out on the reefs to mow it all down
okay
second amazing thing after all of that
eating they poop fine white sand a
single parrotfish can produce over 380
kilograms of this pulverized coral each
year sometimes when scuba diving I would
look up from my clipboard and just see
contrails of parrotfish poop
raining down so next time you're
lounging on a tropical white sand beach
maybe thank a parrot
third they have so much style modeled
and striped teal magenta yellow orange
polka-dotted parrotfish are a big part
of what makes coral reefs so colorful
plus in true diva style they have
multiple wardrobe changes throughout
their lives
a juvenile outfit and intermediate getup
and a terminal look forth with this last
wardrobe change comes a sex change from
female to male
termed sequential hermaphrodite ISM
these large males then gather harems of
females to spawn heterosexual monogamy
is certainly not nature status quo and
parrotfish exemplifies some of the
beauty of diverse reproductive
strategies fifth and the most incredible
sometimes when parrotfish cozy up into a
nook in the reef at night they secrete a
mucus bubble from a gland in their head
that envelops their entire body this
masks their scent from predators and
protects them from parasites so they can
sleep soundly I mean how cool is this so
this is a confession of my love for
parrotfish in all their flamboyant algae
eating sand pooping sex changing glory
but with this love comes heartache now
that groupers and snappers are woefully
overfished fishermen are targeting
parrotfish spearfishing took out the
large species midnight blue and rainbow
parrotfish are now exceedingly rare and
nuts and traps are scooping up the
smaller species as both a marine
biologist and a single person I can tell
you there aren't that many fish in a sea
and then there's my love for their home
the coral reef which was once as vibrant
as Caribbean cultures as colorful as the
architecture and as bustling as Carnival
because of climate change on top of
overfishing and pollution coral reefs
may be gone within 30 years an entire
ecosystem erased
this is devastating because hundreds of
millions of people around the world
depend on reefs for their nutrition and
income let that sink in a little bit of
good news is that places like Belize
Barbuda and Byrne air are protecting
these VIPs very important parrotfish
also more and more places are
establishing protected areas that
protect the entire ecosystem these are
critical efforts but it's not enough as
I stand here today only 2.2 percent of
the ocean is protected meanwhile 90% of
that large fish and 80 percent of the
coral on Caribbean reefs is already gone
we're in the midst of the sixth mass
extinction and we humans are causing it
we also have the solutions reverse
climate change and overfishing protect
half the ocean and stop pollution
running from land but these are massive
undertakings requiring systemic changes
and we're really taking our sweet time
getting around to it each of us can
contribute though with our votes our
voices our food choices our skills and
our dollars
we must overhaul both corporate
practices and government policies we
must transform culture building
community around solutions is the most
important thing I am never going to give
up working to protect and restore this
magnificent planet every bit of habitat
we preserve every tenth of a degree of
warming we prevent really does matter
thankfully I'm not motivated by hope but
rather a desire to be useful because I
don't know how to give an honest talk
about my beloved parrotfish and coral
reefs that has a happy ending thank you
[Applause]